AGENTS.md: narrow which plugins need a changelog entry for a shared package change (#51688)
Automattic/jetpack: AGENTS.md

An entry only lands in the CHANGELOG of the project it was added to. A PR confined to a shared project — a PHP package under `projects/packages/`, a JS package under `projects/js-packages/`, or any other non-plugin project — therefore reaches that project's CHANGELOG and nowhere else: the plugins that bundle it get, at most, the generic "Update package dependencies." line the release tooling files under "Other changes", which is never copied to `readme.txt`. Users, release posts, and support documentation read the plugin changelog, so the change is invisible to them.

**When a change to a package or js-package is user-facing — a new block, new or changed UI, a behavior change, a bug fix someone would notice — add an entry to each plugin whose own users would notice it, on top of the project's own entry.** That is usually a subset of the plugins that bundle the project, and often just one. Write each one from that plugin's user's perspective; the wording rarely needs to be identical.

> Over-reporting is not free. A file under `projects/plugins/<plugin>/changelog/` requests review from that plugin's CODEOWNERS, so an unnecessary entry pings a team with nothing to review — and it puts a line about a product the plugin does not ship into a changelog and `readme.txt` that its users do read.

Reviewer: I'd leave off the first half of this second paragraph. If plugin owners have a CODEOWNERS entry, they can easily enough exclude the changlog and composer.lock files if those are too noisy. The second part is valid.

Author: Yeah fair enough, dropped the CODEOWNERS half and kept the changelog/readme.txt part. 350f7cd003c

Prefix each plugin's entry with the product the shared project backs — `Premium Analytics:` for `packages/premium-analytics`, `Search:` for `packages/search` — so readers of a plugin changelog that bundles many products can place the change. The exception is a plugin named for that same product (`plugins/premium-analytics`, `plugins/search`): there the prefix would only repeat the plugin's own name, so leave it off (or use a narrower component prefix), as in the example below.

Start from the plugins that bundle the project (works the same for `packages/…` and `js-packages/…`):

```bash
jp dependencies list packages/search --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
jp dependencies list js-packages/components --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
```

Then narrow that list. A widely-shared js-package can list well over a dozen plugins; add an entry for one only when a user of *that plugin* could notice the change. Skip it when:

> - **The change belongs to another product and this plugin only hosts the shell.** A change to a My Jetpack product card, or to a package behind one such as `js-packages/boost-score-api`, belongs in the changelogs of the plugins that ship that product. Every other plugin renders the card only for someone who already has that product installed, and they read about it in that product's changelog.

Reviewer: The wording here seems off. Maybe better something like

```suggestion
- **The change belongs to another product and this plugin only contains it via a My Jetpack product card.** A change to a My Jetpack product card, or to a package behind one such as `js-packages/boost-score-api`, belongs in the changelogs of the plugins that ship that product. Every other plugin renders the card only for someone who already has that product installed, and they read about it in that product's changelog.
```

Author: Taken as is, reads much better. 350f7cd003c

Author: Heads up that I've had to touch your wording since taking it, so you get a say - the rule is unchanged, but the example was wrong.

`js-packages/boost-score-api` isn't only behind the My Jetpack card: `plugins/jetpack/_inc/client/at-a-glance/boost/index.jsx` imports it directly for At a Glance. So as an example of "this plugin only contains it via a card" it was the wrong pick. I've turned it into the caution that goes with the rule instead - check the card really is the only route, because for this one it isn't.

Also changed "already has that product installed" to "already has that product", since the cards render off owned products and you can own Boost through a plan without ever installing it.

Happy to go back to your exact wording with a different example if you'd rather. 7b01598446d

> - **The plugin never reaches the changed code.** `js-packages/components` is a build dependency of nearly every plugin in the monorepo, but `DiffViewer` is imported by exactly one file, in `plugins/protect`. Grep the changed symbol under `projects/plugins/<plugin>/` before adding an entry for it.

Reviewer: > Grep the changed symbol under `projects/plugins/<plugin>/` before adding an entry for it.

That's too narrow. It'll miss a case like e.g. `packages/backup` uses the thing while `plugins/backup` is virtually empty except for loading the package.

Author: Ah you're right, and it turns out my own example was wrong for exactly that reason - `DiffViewer` is imported by `js-packages/scan` too, which puts it in `plugins/jetpack` and not just protect. So the doc was telling people to run the check that produced the wrong answer in the doc 😄

Replaced it with one that walks the whole bundle:

```bash
grep -rl DiffViewer $( jp dependencies list plugins/protect --add-dependencies --extra build --no-dev | sed 's!^!projects/!' )
```

350f7cd003c

Author: Following up here because the command I pasted above has changed twice since, and the version in this thread is wrong - sorry about that.

Two problems with it. It greps the plugin's whole dependency closure, and the project that *defines* the symbol is in every dependent's closure, so it matched for every plugin - `plugins/social` included, which can't reach `DiffViewer` at all. And `grep -r` on a checkout you've built or `composer install`ed picks the symbol up out of webpack caches and `vendor/composer/*classmap.php`, and those classmaps list every class in the plugin's closure, so for a PHP symbol it hands back every dependent plugin. Exactly the over-reporting the section is about 😅

What's in there now works backwards from the code instead:

```bash
git grep -l DiffViewer -- projects/
jp dependencies list js-packages/scan plugins/protect --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
```

And it now says out loud that this is a shortlist, not an answer - the second command returns `plugins/jetpack`, but that's a false positive, `packages/scan` imports `ThreatsDataViews` from `js-packages/scan` and never `ThreatModal`, which is the only thing using `DiffViewer`. So it's `plugins/protect` alone. 7b01598446d

> - **It is reachable only under conditions the plugin never creates** — a module it does not register, a plan or product it does not sell, or a host it does not run on, such as the WordPress.com Simple and Atomic paths in `packages/masterbar`.

Reviewer: Those paths would be relevant for plugins/wpcomsh and plugins/jetpack-mu-wpcom-plugin. Not that anyone cares about their changelogs AFAIK.

Author: True, that was a bad example. Flipped it round so it makes the opposite point instead - the WPCOM paths never run on a self hosted site, but they're the whole reason wpcomsh bundles masterbar, so the same change qualifies for one plugin and not another. 350f7cd003c

> - **The plugin's changelog has no site-owner audience.** `starter-plugin` is a scaffolding template, and `beta`, `debug-helper` and `inspect` are internal tools; their changelogs are not a product record.

Reviewer: Is `inspect` an internal tool, or is it something that was intended to be used by site owners but never got launched?

`beta` similarly might find some changes relevant.

Author: I couldn't work out inspect to be honest. It's still on 2.0.0-a.11 with a boilerplate readme and no `wp-plugin-slug`, but that's not really evidence either way, so I just dropped it rather than assert sth wrong. If you know its story I'm happy to put it back.

Dropped `beta` as well and added a line saying it does run on real sites, so a change its users would notice belongs in its changelog. Left `starter-plugin` and `debug-helper`. 350f7cd003c

Author: Small update on this one since my reply above - `debug-helper` has gone from the list too. It has no monorepo dependencies at all, so like `beta` it can never turn up in an `--add-dependents` list, which makes it a confusing thing to name in a bullet about narrowing that list. Same reason `beta` went.

The bullet is now just `starter-plugin` and `mu-wpcom-plugin` - both genuinely appear in those lists, and `mu-wpcom-plugin`'s own README calls it a test plugin for the jetpack-mu-wpcom package.

Still keen on your read of `inspect` whenever you get a moment, it's the one I couldn't settle. It does appear in dependents lists, so as things stand an agent will file entries there. 7b01598446d

To settle the reachability case, work backwards from the code rather than forwards from the plugin. Grepping `projects/plugins/<plugin>/` alone misses a plugin that is little more than a loader for a package, and grepping its whole dependency closure always matches, since the project that defines the symbol is in every dependent's closure. Find the projects that import it, then ask which plugins bundle *those* — every one except the project that defines the symbol, which is in the grep output too and would hand back its full set of dependents:

```bash
git grep -l DiffViewer -- projects/
jp dependencies list js-packages/scan plugins/protect --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
```

Use `git grep`, not `grep -r`. A checkout you have built or run `composer install` in carries the symbol in webpack caches and in `vendor/composer/*classmap.php`, and those classmaps name every class in a plugin's whole dependency closure — so `grep -r` on a PHP symbol hands back every dependent plugin, which is the answer this section exists to talk you out of.

> What that gives you is a shortlist, not an answer. Bundling a project is not the same as rendering its code, which is the distinction the whole section turns on, so finish the job by hand. `DiffViewer` is the cautionary case: the second command returns `plugins/protect` and `plugins/jetpack`, but `js-packages/scan` uses `DiffViewer` only inside `ThreatModal`, and `packages/scan` — how `plugins/jetpack` reaches that package at all — imports `ThreatsDataViews` and `ThreatSeverityBadge` from it and never `ThreatModal`. So a `DiffViewer` change is noticeable in `plugins/protect` alone.

Reviewer 2: I ran the recipe on a real `DiffViewer` change (a `title` tooltip on the filename row). It works — 18 plugins → 2 → 1. But the walkthrough explains the last step wrong.

Running the two grep leads separately, which step 3 currently concatenates into one command:

```
js-packages/scan  → plugins/protect, plugins/jetpack
plugins/protect   → plugins/protect
```

`js-packages/scan` carries **both** plugins — so the rebuttal in this paragraph knocks out `plugins/protect` too, not just `plugins/jetpack`. And it should: `ThreatModal` has no consumers anywhere. It's defined, barrel-exported at `src/components/index.js:2`, and used only in its own story.

`plugins/protect` survives on the other lead entirely: `paid-list.jsx:4` imports `DiffViewer` straight from `@automattic/jetpack-components`.

Two suggestions:

1. Say the `js-packages/scan` route rules out both, and that protect stands on its own direct import.
2. Split step 3 into one command per lead — merging them is what hides which lead carries which plugin:

```bash
git grep -l DiffViewer -- projects/ ':!*/CHANGELOG.md'   # 5 of the 7 hits were changelog/readme/story noise
jp dependencies list js-packages/scan --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
jp dependencies list plugins/protect --add-dependents --extra build --no-dev | grep '^plugins/'
```

Author: Thanks for actually running it @xavier-lc, and you're right on both counts - I confirmed the same thing here.

`ThreatModal` really does have no consumers: `git grep -n ThreatModal -- projects/` only ever shows it defined, barrel-exported at `js-packages/scan/src/components/index.js:2`, and rendered in its own story. So the rebuttal I wrote knocks out `plugins/protect` too, and my "so it's protect alone" landed on the right answer by the wrong route 😅 Protect stands on `paid-list.jsx:4` importing `DiffViewer` from `@automattic/jetpack-components` directly, which is a completely separate lead.

Taken both suggestions in 1a20c22e219 - one `jp dependencies list` per lead, and the walkthrough now says the `js-packages/scan` lead settles neither plugin and that protect survives on the other one. Added the `':!*/CHANGELOG.md'` pathspec too, with a line on why a changelog hit isn't a lead.

That's the second time this example has caught me out, which I guess makes it the right example to keep 🙂

- **The change belongs to another product and this plugin only contains it via a My Jetpack product card.** A change to a My Jetpack product card belongs in the changelogs of the plugins that ship that product. Every other plugin renders the card only for someone who already has that product, and they read about it in that product's changelog. Check that the card really is the only route, though: `js-packages/boost-score-api` sits behind the Boost card, but `plugins/jetpack` also calls it straight from At a Glance, so a change there reaches Jetpack plugin users too.
- **The plugin never reaches the changed code.** `js-packages/components` is a build dependency of nearly every plugin in the monorepo, but `DiffViewer` reaches only `plugins/protect`.
- **It is reachable only under conditions the plugin never creates** — a module it does not register, a plan or product it does not sell, or a host it does not run on. Check the gate rather than the dependency, because the same code can qualify for one plugin and not another: the WordPress.com-only paths in `packages/masterbar` never run on a self-hosted site, but they are the whole reason `plugins/wpcomsh` bundles the package.

> - **The plugin's changelog is not a product record.** `starter-plugin` is a scaffolding template and `mu-wpcom-plugin` is a test harness for `packages/jetpack-mu-wpcom`; nobody reads either changelog to find out what changed on their site. Keep this one narrow: it is about those two, not about any plugin you have not heard of.

Reviewer: > and `mu-wpcom-plugin` is a test harness for `packages/jetpack-mu-wpcom`

`mu-wpcom-plugin` is also the mechanism for the package to be deployed to WordPress.com Simple. When that package was introduced, we already had code for deploying a _plugin_ but not a _package_, so we created the wrapper plugin for that purpose too.

The testing aspect has since decreased, now that wpcomsh is in the monorepo and Jetpack Beta Tester can load that directly.

Author: Ah that's useful history, thanks @anomiex - I'd taken the README ("Test plugin for the jetpack-mu-wpcom package") at face value and missed that the deploy wrapper is the bigger half of it these days.

Reworded in 1a20c22e219. The skip still holds I think, just for a better reason: nobody installs the wrapper either way, so what a Simple site owner would notice belongs in `packages/jetpack-mu-wpcom`'s own entry rather than in a second copy in the plugin. Let me know if that framing is still off anywhere 🙂

**The non-interactive form never prompts for this.** Naming a project (`jp changelog add <project> -s … -t … -e …`) disables the indirect-plugin check, so dependent plugins are silently skipped; only bare `jp changelog add` offers to write those entries for you. Using the non-interactive form means adding the plugin entries yourself — or running `jp changelog add --check-indirect-plugins` afterwards to be asked.

> **And the prompt it does show is all-or-nothing.** It offers every indirectly-affected plugin as a single list and, on a `yes`, writes the entry to all of them. When only some of them qualify, answer `no` and add those entries yourself with the non-interactive form.

Reviewer: This is incorrect. It gives the same prompt that the main run does.

```
The following plugins are indirectly affected by this commit: plugins/wpcomsh plugins/wpcloud-sso plugins/videopress plugins/stats plugins/starter-plugin plugins/social plugins/search plugins/protect plugins/premium-analytics plugins/paypal-payment-buttons plugins/mu-wpcom-plugin plugins/jetpack plugins/inspect plugins/classic-theme-helper-plugin plugins/boost plugins/backup plugins/automattic-for-agencies-client plugins/agents-manager
✔ Is this change something an end user or site administrator of a site using any of those plugins would like to know about? (Y/n) · true
? Found 17 project(s) that can accept the same changelog and 1 project(s) that need individual ones. Create and add the same changelog to the ones we're able? (Y/n) ‣ 
```

Author: You're right - I went through the code and it hands the list to the same `changelogAddPrompt()` the main run uses. What I was actually trying to say is that the yes/no covers the whole list, and the follow up prompts only choose shared vs individual wording, not which plugins get an entry. Reworded in 350f7cd003c.
